Global Risk Mapping of Bat- and Rodent-borne Diseases: Insights for Preventing Disease X
Future pandemics can be from an unknown pathogen, the so-called “pathogen X”, capable of causing Disease X, a disease with epidemic or pandemic potential. Pathogen X is likely to be a virus capable of zoonotic spillover, given that many emerging infections in humans are caused by viruses originating from wildlife. Bat- and Rodent-borne diseases are among the most likely candidates for a future Disease X. Control and prevention of such outbreaks are lacking at global and regional scale, compared to vector-borne diseases. Mapping the distribution of past  Bat- and Rodent-borne diseases and studying the drivers that influence their emergence and spread would benefit the prevention and control of future Disease X. 
We used geospatial modeling that predicted the global distribution of Bat- and Rodent-borne diseases using published occurrence data from previous zoonotic outbreaks and a set of ecologic and demographic drivers. The resulting map had a high predictive capacity for Bat- and Rodent-borne diseases (true skill statistic = 0.93, 0.96, respectively). The Bat-borne disease model showed that precipitation and bushmeat activities were its principal drivers, while the distribution of Rodent-borne diseases was influenced by deforestation, population density, and minimum temperature. The distribution of Bat-borne diseases was mainly restricted to Africa. In comparison, Rodent-borne diseases were widely distributed across the Americas and Europe. Our results provide a valuable foundation for public health policies, offering a visual tool for global health agencies to prioritise surveillance and allocation of resources for the early detection of a future Disease X. Understanding the environmental and socio-economic factors that drive zoonotic disease outbreaks can aid in identifying potential hotspots for Disease X, enabling proactive measures and rapid response strategies.

